encryption: add tikv kms encryption for gcp and azure (#16761)
pingcap/docs: encryption-at-rest.md

Author: preview of this PR: https://pingcap-docsite-preview-git-pr-qiancai.vercel.app/tidb/dev/encryption-at-rest

TiKV supports encryption at rest. This feature allows TiKV to transparently encrypt data files using [AES](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Encryption_Standard) or [SM4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SM4_(cipher)) in [CTR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation) mode. To enable encryption at rest, an encryption key must be provided by the user and this key is called master key. TiKV automatically rotates data keys that it used to encrypt actual data files. Manually rotating the master key can be done occasionally. Note that encryption at rest only encrypts data at rest (namely, on disk) and not while data is transferred over network. It is advised to use TLS together with encryption at rest.

> Optionally, you can use KMS for both cloud and self-hosted deployments. You can also supply the plaintext master key in a file.

Author: ```suggestion
Optionally, you can use KMS for both cloud and self-hosted deployments. You can also supply the plaintext master key in a file.
```
```suggestion
You can use Key Management Service (KMS) for both cloud and self-hosted deployments or supply the plaintext master key in a file.
```

* Master key. The master key is provided by user and is used to encrypt the data keys TiKV generates. Management of master key is external to TiKV.
* Data key. The data key is generated by TiKV and is the key actually used to encrypt data.

> The same master key can be shared by multiple instances of TiKV. The recommended way to provide a master key in production is via KMS. Currently, TiKV supports KMS encryption on [AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/zh_cn/kms/index.html), [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/security/products/security-), and [Azure](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/zh_cn/kms/index.html). To enable KMS encryption, you need to create a customer master key (CMK) through KMS, and then provide the CMK key ID to TiKV using the configuration file. If TiKV fails to get access to the KMS CMK, it will fail to start or restart.

Author: ```suggestion
The same master key can be shared by multiple instances of TiKV. The recommended way to provide a master key in production is via KMS. Currently, TiKV supports KMS encryption on [AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/index.html), [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/security/products/security-key-management), and [Azure](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/index.html). To enable KMS encryption, you need to create a customer master key (CMK) through KMS, and then provide the CMK key ID to TiKV using the configuration file. If TiKV fails to get access to the KMS CMK, it will fail to start or restart.
```

Regardless of data encryption method, data keys are encrypted using AES256 in GCM mode for additional authentication. This required the master key to be 256 bits (32 bytes), when passing from file instead of KMS.

### Configure encryption

To enable encryption, you can add the encryption section in the configuration files of TiKV and PD:

```
[security.encryption]
data-encryption-method = "aes128-ctr"
data-key-rotation-period = "168h" # 7 days
```

- `data-encryption-method` specifies the encryption algorithm. The possible values are `"aes128-ctr"`, `"aes192-ctr"`, `"aes256-ctr"`, `"sm4-ctr"` (only for v6.3.0 and later versions), and `"plaintext"`. The default value is `"plaintext"`, which means that encryption is disabled by default.

>     - For a new TiKV cluster or an existing TiKV cluster, only data written after encryption is enabled is guaranteed to be encrypted.

Author: ```suggestion
    - For a new TiKV cluster or an existing TiKV cluster, only data written after encryption has been enabled is guaranteed to be encrypted.
```

    - To disable encryption after it is enabled, remove `data-encryption-method` from the configuration file or set its value to `"plaintext"`, and then restart TiKV.

>     - To change the encryption algorithm, replace `data-encryption-method` with a supported encryption algorithm, and then restart TiKV. After the replacement, as new data is written in, the encryption file generated by the previous encryption algorithm is gradually rewritten to a file generated by the new encryption algorithm.

Author: ```suggestion
    - To change the encryption algorithm, replace `data-encryption-method` with a supported encryption algorithm, and then restart TiKV. After the replacement, as new data is written in, the encryption files generated by the previous encryption algorithm are gradually rewritten to files generated by the new encryption algorithm.
```

>     - To change the encryption algorithm, replace `data-encryption-method` with a supported encryption algorithm, and then restart TiKV. after replacing the encryption algorithm, the encrypted file generated by the old encryption algorithm will be gradually rewritten to the encrypted file generated by the new encryption algorithm as new data is written.

Author: ```suggestion
    - To change the encryption algorithm, replace `data-encryption-method` with a supported encryption algorithm, and then restart TiKV. After the replacement, as new data is written in, the encryption file generated by the previous encryption algorithm is gradually rewritten to a file generated by the new encryption algorithm.
```

- `data-key-rotation-period` specifies how often TiKV rotates keys.

If encryption is enabled (that is, the value of `data-encryption-method` is not `"plaintext"`), you must specify a master key in either of the following ways:

- [Specify a master key via KMS](#specify-the-master-key-via-kms)
- [Specify a master key via a file](#specify-the-master-key-via-file)

#### Specify a master key via KMS

TiKV supports KMS encryption for three platforms: AWS, Google Cloud, and Azure. Depending on the platform where your service is deployed, you can choose one of them to configure KMS encryption.

> <SimpleTab

Author: ```suggestion
<SimpleTab>
```

<div label="AWS KMS">

> **Step 1: Creating a master key**

Author: ```suggestion
**Step 1: Create a master key**
```

> To create a key on AWS, follow these steps:

Author: ```suggestion
To create a key on AWS, take these steps:
```

Regardless of data encryption method, data keys are encrypted using AES256 in GCM mode for additional authentication. This required the master key to be 256 bits (32 bytes), when passing from file instead of KMS.

### Configure encryption

To enable encryption, you can add the encryption section in the configuration files of TiKV and PD:

```
[security.encryption]
data-encryption-method = "aes128-ctr"
data-key-rotation-period = "168h" # 7 days
```

- `data-encryption-method` specifies the encryption algorithm. The possible values are `"aes128-ctr"`, `"aes192-ctr"`, `"aes256-ctr"`, `"sm4-ctr"` (only for v6.3.0 and later versions), and `"plaintext"`. The default value is `"plaintext"`, which means that encryption is disabled by default.

    - For a new TiKV cluster or an existing TiKV cluster, only data written after encryption has been enabled is guaranteed to be encrypted.
    - To disable encryption after it is enabled, remove `data-encryption-method` from the configuration file or set its value to `"plaintext"`, and then restart TiKV.

>     - To change the encryption algorithm, replace `data-encryption-method` with a supported encryption algorithm, and then restart TiKV. After the replacement, as new data is written in, the encryption files generated by the previous encryption algorithm are gradually rewritten to files generated by the new encryption algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - To change the encryption algorithm, replace the value of `data-encryption-method` with a supported encryption algorithm, and then restart TiKV. After the replacement, as new data is written in, the encryption files generated by the previous encryption algorithm are gradually rewritten to files generated by the new encryption algorithm.
```

- `data-key-rotation-period` specifies how often TiKV rotates keys.

If encryption is enabled (that is, the value of `data-encryption-method` is not `"plaintext"`), you must specify a master key in either of the following ways:

> - [Specify a master key via KMS](#specify-the-master-key-via-kms)
> - [Specify a master key via a file](#specify-the-master-key-via-file)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Specify a master key via KMS](#specify-a-master-key-via-kms)
- [Specify a master key via a file](#specify-a-master-key-via-file)
```

> - [Specify a master key via a file](#specify-a-master-key-via-file)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Specify a master key via a file](#specify-a-master-key-via-a-file)
```

The `--target-key-id` to enter in the second command is in the output of the first command.

> **Step 2: Configure the master key**

Author: ```suggestion
**Step 2. Configure the master key**
```

The `key-id` specifies the key ID for the KMS CMK. The `region` is the AWS region name for the KMS CMK. The `endpoint` is optional and you do not need to specify it normally unless you are using an AWS KMS-compatible service from a non-AWS vendor or need to use a [VPC endpoint for KMS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/kms-vpc-endpoint.html).

You can also use [multi-Region keys](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/multi-region-keys-overview.html) in AWS. For this, you need to set up a primary key in a specific region and add replica keys in the regions you require.

> </div>
> 
> <div label="Google Cloud KMS">

Author: ```suggestion

</div>
<div label="Google Cloud KMS">
```

```

Make sure to replace the values of `"key-ring-name"`, `"key-name"`, `"global"`, and `"30d"` in the preceding command with the names and configurations corresponding to your actual key.

**Step 2: Configure the master key**

To specify the master key using Google Cloud KMS, add the `[security.encryption.master-key]` configuration after the `[security.encryption]` section:

```
[security.encryption.master-key]
type = "kms"
key-id = "projects/project-name/locations/global/keyRings/key-ring-name/cryptoKeys/key-name"
vendor = "gcp"

[security.encryption.master-key.gcp]
credential-file-path = "/path/to/credential.json"
```

- `key-id` specifies the key ID of the KMS CMK.
- `credential-file-path` specifies the path of the authentication credentials file, which currently supports two types of credentials: Service Account and Authentication User. If the TiKV environment is already configured with [application default credentials](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/application-default-credentials), there is no need to configure `credential-file-path`.

> </div>
> 
> <div label="Azure KMS">

Author: ```suggestion
</div>
<div label="Azure KMS">
```

**Step 1: Create a master key**

To create a key on Azure, refer to the instructions in [Set and retrieve a key from Azure Key Vault using the Azure portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/key-vault/keys/quick-create-portal).

**Step 2: Configure the master key**

To specify the master key using Azure KMS, add the `[security.encryption.master-key]` configuration after the `[security.encryption]` section in the TiKV configuration file:

```
[security.encryption.master-key]
type = 'kms'
key-id = 'your-kms-key-id'
region = 'region-name'
endpoint = 'endpoint'
vendor = 'azure'

[security.encryption.master-key.azure]
tenant-id = 'tenant_id'
client-id = 'client_id'
keyvault-url = 'keyvault_url'
hsm-name = 'hsm_name'
hsm-url = 'hsm_url'
# The following four fields are optional, used to set client authentication credentials. You can configure them according to the requirements of your scenario.
client_certificate = ""
client_certificate_path = ""
client_certificate_password = ""
client_secret = ""
```

Except `vendor`, you need to modify the values of other fields in the preceding configuration to the corresponding configuration of the actual key.

> </div>
> 
> </SimpleTab>

Author: ```suggestion

</div>
</SimpleTab>
```

You can also use [multi-Region keys](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/multi-region-keys-overview.html) in AWS. For this, you need to set up a primary key in a specific region and add replica keys in the regions you require.
</div>

<div label="Google Cloud KMS">

**Step 1: Create a master key**

To create a key on Google Cloud, take the following steps:

1. Go to the [Key Management](https://console.cloud.google.com/security/kms/keyrings) page in the Google Cloud console.
2. Click **Create key ring**. Enter a name for the key ring, select a location of the key ring, and then click **Create**. Note that the location of the key ring needs to cover the region where the TiDB cluster is deployed.
3. Select the key ring you created in the previous step, and then click **Create Key** on the key ring details page.

> 4. Enter a name for the key, set the information for the key as follows, and then click **Create**.

Author: ```suggestion
4. Enter a name for the key, set the key information as follows, and then click **Create**.
```

    - **Protection level**: **Software** or **HSM**
    - **Key Material**: **Generated key**
    - **Purpose**: **Symmetric encrypt/decrypt**

You can also perform this operation using the gcloud CLI:

```shell
gcloud kms keyrings create "key-ring-name" --location "global"
gcloud kms keys create "key-name" --keyring "key-ring-name" --location "global" --purpose "encryption" --rotation-period "30d"
```

Make sure to replace the values of `"key-ring-name"`, `"key-name"`, `"global"`, and `"30d"` in the preceding command with the names and configurations corresponding to your actual key.

**Step 2: Configure the master key**

To specify the master key using Google Cloud KMS, add the `[security.encryption.master-key]` configuration after the `[security.encryption]` section:

```
[security.encryption.master-key]
type = "kms"
key-id = "projects/project-name/locations/global/keyRings/key-ring-name/cryptoKeys/key-name"
vendor = "gcp"

[security.encryption.master-key.gcp]
credential-file-path = "/path/to/credential.json"
```

- `key-id` specifies the key ID of the KMS CMK.

> - `credential-file-path` specifies the path of the authentication credentials file, which currently supports two types of credentials: Service Account and Authentication User. If the TiKV environment is already configured with [application default credentials](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/application-default-credentials), there is no need to configure the `credential-file-path`.

Author: ```suggestion
- `credential-file-path` specifies the path of the authentication credentials file, which currently supports two types of credentials: Service Account and Authentication User. If the TiKV environment is already configured with [application default credentials](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/application-default-credentials), there is no need to configure `credential-file-path`.
```

</div>

<div label="Azure KMS">

**Step 1: Create a master key**

> To create a key on Azure, refer to the instructions in [Set and retrieve keys in Azure Key Vault using Azure portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/key-vault/keys/quick-create-portal).

Author: ```suggestion
To create a key on Azure, refer to the instructions in [Set and retrieve a key from Azure Key Vault using the Azure portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/key-vault/keys/quick-create-portal).
```

**Step 2: Configure the master key**

To specify the master key using Azure KMS, add the `[security.encryption.master-key]` configuration after the `[security.encryption]` section in the TiKV configuration file:

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

```
[security.encryption.master-key]
type = 'kms'
key-id = 'your-kms-key-id'
region = 'region-name'
endpoint = 'endpoint'
vendor = 'azure'

[security.encryption.master-key.azure]
tenant-id = 'tenant_id'
client-id = 'client_id'
keyvault-url = 'keyvault_url'
hsm-name = 'hsm_name'
hsm-url = 'hsm_url'
# The following four fields are optional, used to set client authentication credentials. You can configure them according to the requirements of your scenario.
client_certificate = ""
client_certificate_path = ""
client_certificate_password = ""
client_secret = ""
```

Except `vendor`, you need to modify the values of other fields in the preceding configuration to the corresponding configuration of the actual key.
</div>

</SimpleTab>

> #### Specify the master key via a file

Author: ```suggestion
#### Specify a master key via a file
```

You can also use [multi-Region keys](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/multi-region-keys-overview.html) in AWS. For this, you need to set up a primary key in a specific region and add replica keys in the regions you require.

</div>
<div label="Google Cloud KMS">

> **Step 1: Create a master key**

Author: ```suggestion
**Step 1. Create a master key**
```

1. Go to the [Key Management](https://console.cloud.google.com/security/kms/keyrings) page in the Google Cloud console.
2. Click **Create key ring**. Enter a name for the key ring, select a location of the key ring, and then click **Create**. Note that the location of the key ring needs to cover the region where the TiDB cluster is deployed.
3. Select the key ring you created in the previous step, and then click **Create Key** on the key ring details page.
4. Enter a name for the key, set the key information as follows, and then click **Create**.

    - **Protection level**: **Software** or **HSM**
    - **Key Material**: **Generated key**
    - **Purpose**: **Symmetric encrypt/decrypt**

You can also perform this operation using the gcloud CLI:

```shell
gcloud kms keyrings create "key-ring-name" --location "global"
gcloud kms keys create "key-name" --keyring "key-ring-name" --location "global" --purpose "encryption" --rotation-period "30d"
```

Make sure to replace the values of `"key-ring-name"`, `"key-name"`, `"global"`, and `"30d"` in the preceding command with the names and configurations corresponding to your actual key.

> **Step 2: Configure the master key**

Author: ```suggestion
**Step 2. Configure the master key**
```

To specify the master key using Google Cloud KMS, add the `[security.encryption.master-key]` configuration after the `[security.encryption]` section:

```
[security.encryption.master-key]
type = "kms"
key-id = "projects/project-name/locations/global/keyRings/key-ring-name/cryptoKeys/key-name"
vendor = "gcp"

[security.encryption.master-key.gcp]
credential-file-path = "/path/to/credential.json"
```

- `key-id` specifies the key ID of the KMS CMK.
- `credential-file-path` specifies the path of the authentication credentials file, which currently supports two types of credentials: Service Account and Authentication User. If the TiKV environment is already configured with [application default credentials](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/application-default-credentials), there is no need to configure `credential-file-path`.

</div>
<div label="Azure KMS">

> **Step 1: Create a master key**

Author: ```suggestion
**Step 1. Create a master key**
```

To create a key on Azure, refer to the instructions in [Set and retrieve a key from Azure Key Vault using the Azure portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/key-vault/keys/quick-create-portal).

> **Step 2: Configure the master key**

Author: ```suggestion
**Step 2. Configure the master key**
```
